
Dystopia Rising Basics
======================

If you have been to a Dystopia Rising game already, you understand that the world is a morally grey place that is trying to survive after the Fall of Mankind. If you have not been to a game as of yet, or if you are just starting to grasp the world, then this forward should help you understand the world in which you will play.

Dystopia Rising takes place at least four generations after the fall of mankind. No one is exactly sure how long it has been since the world became infected with the undead and was then blasted with nuclear radiation, so the best that the survivors have been able to do is count the number of generations that have come before them. For the longest-lived, four generations may have passed. For those who deal with the threats of the world, generations could be over a dozen lifetimes passed. Written stories and tales passed by word of mouth creates what is the remaining history of those first few generations of survivors, and misinformation has clouded the tragic events of what was the original point of impact.

Prior to the fall, mankind did everything they could to record and share data across the world; unfortunately, as green movements and land ll concerns took the forefront of human focus, the shift from hard sustainable technology to digital and virtual mediums caused a massive period of human growth to be lost. Music released primarily on digital formats all but disappeared. Information primarily shared via the internet and the TV was eradicated via EMP and low level ground destruction. Generations of neglect, misunderstanding, and misuse caused localized electronic equipment to break or fall into disuse. The love of video game systems, digital music players, and mass media movies were all lost due to delicate and short-lived technology. Our culture, the culture of the modern day, became irrelevant and laughable to the next generation of survivors.

Mankind lost most of the advancements from the mid-1990s forward, and comforts of the modern age were replaced with tools for survival. The ancestors of today’s survivors were the first strain of deviation of the human condition, the initial contact with the mutating zombie infection, and were able to survive the rapidly spreading epidemic. Those ancestors then taught their children, born in a deadly world, how to survive. Those children, the first generation of the new ‘strains’ of humanity, adapted to existing within this deadly new world and in turn taught their children how to live in the ruined world. History was not taught often; instead, survival skills such as melee combat and firearm maintenance was viewed as a priority. This generation reproduced and created what would be the parents of your generation. Now barely representing humanity, these strains of creation were newly adapted to a horrific world.

This is the world in which you live. Small communities come together in a world where concepts such as ‘democracy’, ‘freedom’, and ‘government’ are newly reborn. Major cities have been all but destroyed; transit has been reduced to animals and wagons on the east coast and the occasional iron horse on the west coast. Humanity has just begun to rebuild the telegraph lines, the postmen have just begun to ride from territory to territory, and large sections of the world are still irradiated or completely overrun by the undead. Steam trains became networks of travel for the affluent and industrialized territories, while small hold-out communities hidden in the wastes worshiped strange cargo-cult gods scraped out of the irradiated soil.

Finding a community of decent size in this world is rare; finding one that has any concept of ‘equality’ or ‘morality’ is rarer still. Welcome to the new ‘Wild West.’ Small towns gather, with the most powerful or influential taking control. Back room deals take place in broad daylight because the masses are afraid of going against the tide. This is a place where sorrow and memories of lost friends are drowned away in the bottom of bottles of cheap hooch. Thieves, cutthroats, undead hordes, infected Raiders, dangerous cults, heartbreak, and tough decisions await you. This is Dystopia, where the only promise you have in life is that eventually it will end... and you will get back up as a zombie.

The survivor in this nuclear wasteland has found their way to a settlement that is the game site for most LARPs. While you may not agree with everything that happens in town, while you may not like most of the people in town, while you may hate the religions and broken moralities of the people in town, chances are good that your character will continue to live in this town BECAUSE THERE IS NO OTHER OPTION. Journeys that take us hours in the modern day take days or weeks in the Dystopian future. Flooded waterways, lack of roads, limited supplies, dangerous threats of survivors and undead, and lastly the cost of making the trip makes the idea of living elsewhere and traveling to your local game illogical. Unless you operate a trade caravan, or live in a farm on the edge of town, the vast majority of people will live in these community centers because it is their only good option.

As the community grows, the questions for survivors then become:

- How do we ensure there is enough food and water for all?
- How do we prevent the outbreak of disease?
- How do we enforce laws and what laws should we have?
- Who is in charge of this compound, this town, this territory?

All of these things are up to you, the players. We do not discourage player to player con ict; we do not discourage changing the political structure. We do not discourage revolution, all we do is portray the appropriate reactions and responses from the outside world and provide stories for you to become involved with as your character.

This is Dystopia. The world is broken. It is up to you to pick up the pieces and to make a new future from the remains of the old world.

What is Dystopia Rising?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Dystopia Rising is a game system that allows people to get together and enjoy one of the oldest forms of entertainment: make believe and imagination.

To go into more detail, Dystopia Rising is a contact safe Live Action Role Playing game (or “LARP”) that takes place in a post-apocalyptic world. At a Dystopia Rising event, each guest portrays the role of a person existing in a bizarre future setting where large governments have collapsed, the nuclear bombs were dropped, and zombies are a painful (and very dangerous) reality.

“Live action” means instead of describing what your character does, you act and do the actions your persona would do. Roleplaying, much like acting, refers to taking on a fictional persona other than your own for the duration of an event. The system we provide allows for an immersive environment where ‘what you see is what you get.’

We are a contact safe game, which means that at times not only will you be talking and acting as your persona would, but you could also become involved in ’Contact Safe Combat,’ a term coined to describe using contact safe props to simulate combat. Instead of just sitting and saying what it is that you are doing, we invite you to do the things that your character would. The goal of these events is ‘the story.’ The same way that people get together after playing football to talk about the highlights of the event, we strive to create an environment where you have those moments to bring home with you. Social interactions that two characters have, complex puzzle plots, and even those moments where you are fighting (or running screaming away from) zombies are incredible; and through these experiences, new friendships are made.

Dystopia Rising LLC is the organization that provides the environment where you get to come make friends, play, and have epic stories to talk about later. We ask you to be safe, abide by the rules, and do the best you can to make sure that everyone around you has a fantastic experience. If all of us do these three things, then there is no limit to how amazing an event can be.

Join the Dystopia Rising community. Meet new people, have new experiences, and maybe even walk away from an event weekend a little better of a person. We are like a murder mystery wrapped together with a knitting circle and a lacrosse game in the post-apocalypse...

/...with zombies.

Environment
~~~~~~~~~~~

At least four generations have passed since the world of humans fell apart. Mass media, government regulated education, mechanized production and international commerce were all but been abandoned many decades ago. The sky has been burned with the remnants of radioactive fallout and any rain that falls could be poisonous to most living things.

Within a year of the first outbreak of the Zombie plague, most of humanity was disorganized and overrun. Turning on itself like a serpent swallowing its own tail, humanity could not survive as it was. Countries fell beneath the weight of their own undead while the mothers, sons, sisters and brothers of yesterday shambled forward as the undead nemesis of tomorrow. The electromagnetic pulse from the nuclear bombs that were used in an attempt to curtail the spread of the undead eradicated the digital tools of humanity, plunging the survivors into a new dark age.

Small bands of humans were able to scratch out a basic existence, and survivors banded together for shared safety. Communities formed, as small as a single family unit or as large as a few blocks, fortified against the threats of the outside world. As life continued to force its way forward, the first generation of the living were born into the land of the dead.

Imagine this first generation, raised in a dangerous world. Literacy and arithmetic have been traded off for munitions handling and scavenging. Youth and a life of untroubled Saturday mornings have been exchanged for a horrifying existence of animated corpses and radioactive storm clouds. The first survivors were forged in fire, but those that were born into this world have never known anything but the flame. Faced with a world they could not escape, they claimed it instead, taking on new names and Strains and leaving much of the old world behind.

If the first generation born to the fallen world blazed a path, the second generation began to truly adapt to the world that was. The strong, the quick, the smart, and the capable survived while others fell. Societies began to grow, as remnants of cultures were passed by word of mouth from the remaining survivors of the generation before. Ideals began to be pulled from the dumpsters and social guidelines were put together out of need for structure. Running, hiding, and surviving were no longer the only drives of society.

It was during the second generation of the infection that a form of the fungal virus (or whatever you wish to call the origins of the zombie infection, since that knowledge was lost) mutated once more and caused a new post-mortal strain of humanity to rise: the Full Dead. These were creatures that were once human, died, and then had their flesh re-knit and reanimate; the Full Dead maintained memories of their human lives from before the Fall. With massive gaps of memory due to extended life with limited brain availability, the Full Dead stood up from their desecrated homes in Europe, and began their new un-lives. Looking to re-civilize the fallen world, the cannibalistic drives of the Full Dead caused a love/hate relationship between the new strains of humanity and the post-mortal animates. Without need for food save for the occasional bit of humanoid flesh, the Full Dead were able to reclaim much of the more abstract knowledge that had been lost and return them to the strains of humanity.

By the turn of the second generation, most of the ingenuity and creations of man were lost to the erosion of time and the relentless predation of the shambling horde. Roads began to resemble black cobbled paths, structures became the skeletal remains of a forgotten land. All that remained of the once proud culture of humanity were broken icons dotting a world aiming to both eradicate and consume the past.

Swarms of the restless dead haunted the remains of the cities, and were drawn to the walls put up by the living as if drawn by the smell of life itself. Unrelenting despite the passing of time, the risk of being consumed by the infection grew more and more. Small bands scavenged and recovered supplies. Churches and towns were spawned, and mankind began to feed upon itself much in the same way the dead did. Slavery, raiding camps, and cannibalism became part of the reality of this second generation, as those that tried to hold onto a sense of humanity were besieged on all sides.

Now at least four generations have passed since the Fall of Mankind, and you and your ilk are born into a dangerous age. Society has just begun to be born again in this dark age of man. The starving dead hunt the land, the virus mutated a thousand different ways since the time of the fall, bands of the morally depraved hunt people as they look to take supplies and slaves, and all the while the world changes and becomes wild once again.

The story you are going to be a part of is focused on a single town or settlement in this post-apocalyptic world. You, as a survivor, have to find your place within the culture and society that is the town. Since the focus of the world is so town specific, the character you play should have a reason for being a part of this town. Perhaps your character was raised in a local survival settlement? Maybe your character wants to become a trade baron, and requires the resources that a town offers? You always had the dream of opening your own bar, or craft shop, and you have come to this town looking to make your way? Could you be a religious pilgrim bringing a message of hope or damnation to this town to build a new parish? It is up to you to write a character back story and reason why your character has come to this town (see "How to Write a Back Story” in the Reference section).

History, “Simplified”
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Piecing together the history of our renewing societies, and piecing together the events of before the fall the pre-cursor ‘humans’ has been a maddening passion for many of us high-minded individuals. While the logical mind would assume that the process of de ning the series of events would just be a simple process of dating materials in relation to our current existence, and then applying dating standards to those artifacts we find from prior cultures, the truth of the matter is that the entire process is much more complex.

So please, understand that what I am discussing with you is the best theory that I have been able to put together and should not be perceived as unarguable fact.

What we know, to date, is that there was a species that predated us Strains known as the humans. Humans were a remarkable creature, with incredible power and potential in their knowledge and technologies. We have been able to recover a number of pre-fall journals that indicated that not only were the cultures of the pre-fall incredibly diverse in their social and artistic senses, but their mastery of machinery and sciences were well beyond our capacity for comprehension. Music, artwork, a dynamic educational systems, financial networks, and highly sophisticated political structures that both did and did not intertwine with their religious culture were all part of the human civilization.

Means of communication from settlement to settlement were paramount, where individuals not even on the same land mass were able to speak with one another in near real time.

In regards to all of the points I have stated so far, most of the high- minded historians of The Hill completely agree. We have also surmised that the environment and resources of the prior world were much different from what we are accustomed to living in. By our counts, the environment of our current day and age in regards to the air, water, and soil would be considered completely un-inhabitable by the pre-fall humans. What we consider a fine spring day would kill the pre-fall humans. We have also learned that many of the technologies they outlined, at least those technologies that are not more robust, simply do not function in our current environment.

As many of their technologies were not designed to operate in a highly irradiated and toxic environment, we often find that their more delicate technological devices do not survive day-to-day existence in our current day.

The historical points that come next are where many high-minded individuals begin to vary and debate the timelines and duration of history. What we were able to find out is that at a certain point of history, society began to strive to new highs and all-time lows. We found that technology and scientific capacity reached near mythical proportions, while concern for the human condition began to erode more and more. Massive organizations and companies began to define what was, and was not, acceptable for day-to-day life. Items that even we, in our hearty states, see as incredibly toxic were allowed as staples in the diets of the common person. We were able to track fringe organizations and groups that, while seen as outsiders to the world, believed in large worldwide conspiracies.

These groups started to believe that hidden organizations were building their currency on financial enslavement, that companies were purposely poisoning the people and the land in the name of higher profits, and that massive global warfare was engaged for financial means. Some believed these groups were trying to thin the herd of humanity, to prevent the world from quickly becoming over-populated, while ensuring that a select percentage of society would be able to continue on.

At some point in the history of humanity, there was a watershed point where the environment drastically changed. The undead began to rise from the grave, people began to carry the infection with them, and there was widespread panic across the world. Large military groups unleashed devastating weaponry on one another in the hopes of stemming the tide of death and destruction that the endemic carried. The world, as a whole, turned on itself like Vegasians at a last thing you can eat buffet.

Humans of a territory called America swarmed to invade cultures to the north and south of them, attempting to find solace and safety in a place not yet touched by the plague. Settlements across Europe locked themselves down, not allowing travel into or out of the territories. Smaller countries, separated from mainland by straits of water, locked themselves down and tried to push back the tide of death and undeath that was spreading across the waking world. Despite their best efforts, though, the plague did eventually spread to nearly all known places (we’re still investigating that).

Communication and record become scarce as this horrific scenario continued. We can estimate that massive destructive devices were used to scar the sky, destroy the ground, and render the more fragile technologies of humanity inert. Over many, many years the world became the toxic environment that we now know.

There are two last points that need consideration and review in regards to our confusion of historic events, and those two points are the duration of the fall and what we now refer to as the ‘Infernal Pastry.’

The first point that needs consideration is that we are unsure how long humanity attempted to continue to hold on. During the time period when the vast majority of the humans were eradicated due to what we have deemed ‘unnatural selection,’ record keeping becomes much more dif cult to find. The rare documentations that we do find have proven difficult to determine their age. Our scientific tools and capacities nowhere match the creations of the Humans, and with that, our comprehension of science and complex tools are liken to that of a simple Gun Chimp figuring out how to pull a trigger.

We’ve been able to figure out that our modern maps drastically vary from the maps created by the humans, but we can’t even account for the changes in pitch of topography. By our estimates, much more of the world should be well beneath the water than it is, and most of the land that does exist should be aligned differently. To the best of our knowledge there very well could be hundreds of years of elapsed time during what is commonly known as the fall of humanity, and the rise of the first Strains. We simply do not know, primarily due to our technologies as well as a circumstance later outlined as the Infernal Pastry.

Beyond that, we do not have a history of events of the fall of Humans as the dominant species that we could use to reference as an aging technique. Even Humans had multiple different forms of telling how many seasons had come and gone, and to date we have not been able to find a cross reference of year keeping records that all have ‘everything went to shit’ circled on one day. Even if we did have a clear history of events, and somehow had the technology to date the more modern objects, we still have to deal with the rapid incline and decline of the environment over historic events that would accelerate or decelerate the means of calculation the duration of time.

The other point that frustrates the intellectual community is a rarely repeated, and yet still routinely documented, occurrence we now refer to as the ‘Infernal Pastry.’ Instances of the Infernal Pastry do not always involve a baked culinary delight, however; the first recorded instance of this particular event did actually involve a Merican and a spongy cream filled pastry cake.

As the story of the Infernal Pastry goes, a scientist was sitting at a bar bemoaning his existence when a Merican walked in with a bag under his arm. Looking over at the bag, the scientist vaguely noted that the Merican was taking food items out of the bag to consume. The Merican got a look of near- religious glee on his face, when he slowly took out an individually wrapped pre-fall pastry cake. Looking at the pastry cake for many minutes, the scientist quickly bought the cake from the Merican (as I remember, the cost was ten bottles of hooch) and then quickly brought the pastry cake to The Hill in The Mass. Bringing a large number of their associates together they discovered that the pastry in question was, without a doubt, a pre-fall pastry that was for some reason still in edible condition. Even the wrapper for the foodstuff was in reasonably good condition, outlining strange chemical combinations for the content of the food.

The spongy dessert was not the only ‘Infernal Pastry’ instance. A number of audio recording devices, human Telling Visions artifacts, strange world comforts, and even delicate clothes have been found. While these objects are without a doubt incredibly rare (and often forcibly scooped up by scienti c and historic community), for some reason they do exist. With the point of reference of this anomaly, we began investigating many old world reliquaries that for various reasons should no longer exist. We estimate that in the time that has passed since the crafting of the Old York and Under Sea structures, nearly none of them should still be standing. The natural wear and tear, environmental conditions, and use should have caused these objects to fall apart a long time ago.

These temporal anomalies, combined with what little firsthand knowledge we have of our history, have left our scientific communities in a clutch. Some theorize that there is a portion of the brain that allows for the perception of the passage of time, and that somehow the Grave Mind and the Infection has latched into that portion of the brain. This would explain why many undead chew on the brain stems, as well as why the skill commonly known as ‘Double Tapping’ is an efficient technique to ensure that reanimating dead do not get back up. Another theory speculates that the concept of time is directly affected by some degree of increased gravitational pull that fluctuates based on the continued movement of this ruined planet. This theory would explain the reason why the average temperature of the planet is in a much higher extreme swing than what was historically recorded, as well as why there is a steady and constant increase in the emitted radiation levels of our environment. Some people say it is some form of psionic nonsense. The psionic focused people are to be considered stupid and should never be allowed into a place of higher learning again.

So as I finish these notes I find myself at a bit of a loss. We don’t know how long Humans hung on, trying to cling as the dominant species of the world. All we know is that the world fell apart, and that we can account for at least four generations passing since the final fall of Humans. If I were to mark the time that the last humans were reduced to nothing more than handfuls of encased survivors, we can estimate that the Strains have existed for only an estimate of 200 to 300 years. At least we get to accept that the world was indeed ruined before we got here, and for some reason, I am staring at a god-damned human made pastry.

-Doctor W.S. Phineas
