Forward
=======

Dystopia Rising, as both LARP and a table top game, began back in 2005 as a game world concept created by Michael Pucci. Starting as just a series of notes and general concepts, the current game did not begin to truly come together until 2009. Although Michael Pucci and Ashley Zdeb began this trip as a private hobby project intended to be shared with their friends, the concept soon grew. In 2010, Dystopia Rising began opening its doors to the general public and allowed people to participate in and affect the game world as a whole.

Since 2009, the game has changed and expanded well beyond a private endeavor. Today, the game is a widely spread network of interlinked gaming businesses, and the game world is enjoyed by thousands as both a live action role playing game and also as a table top gaming universe.

Additional materials were created to assist with the training, supplies, and further de nition of the game universe; these included table top materials, live action role playing rules, and Dystopia Rising Network-provided game Director materials. In the four years since Dystopia Rising became available to the public, over 5,000 pages of support material have been produced and made available. Between the initial conceptual design and the expansion into a full living and breathing community, well over 1,000 pages of LARP game support materials have been produced. These materials outline antagonists, check-in procedures, book keeping, storytelling techniques, blueprints, and territory maps. At the time of the production of this book, a trilogy of novels will have been released, nine table top books, and two LARP books.

All of this was produced in roughly four short years.

We have no intent on stopping there. The current design outlook is for a total of 13 table top books that outline the majority of the world. In addition, we are looking at supplementary assistance materials like in-character creature guides, in-genre equipment guides (catalogs), and even texts written from within the world itself, all to help provide a colorful perspective of the world. We have penciled in potential additional books if there is an interest for it, and we plan on supporting all of these table top materials with matching live action roleplay translations.

With all of these additional source materials being available, we have had one focus in regards to our live action mechanics and rules: keep it short and simple. Originally we designed the Dystopia Rising LARP rules in a massive format that had very detailed legal-document style speak for every single Skill, every single situation we could imagine, and nearly every single scenario. De nitions of each Skill were almost all half a page long or more. Each Skill was overly detailed and cumbersome.

What we found in the first play tests and events was that we had a good amount of debate, argument, and rules discussion. So we reworded almost every Skill (sometimes multiple times) and provided the simplest statement we could for each Skill’s mechanics. We tried to capture the spirit of the rules and provide a design where the rules ‘did exactly what they said’ instead of being ‘open for interpretation.’ What we found was that we had almost the exact same amount of rules debate and discussion (from the same people); however, we had a lot more people showing up to game. The complex wording and long explanations actually worked as a barrier to prevent people from trying game for the first time.

As we continue to expand and provide more resources for the world, understand one thing: it is our goal to continue to try to keep rules and mechanics as simple as possible. In addition, as technology and gaming techniques advance, so too will our game design to adapt to these new innovations. This means that the LARP rules as a whole can, and will, occasionally change. The LARP rules will evolve to adapt to the needs and want of the network, and we will attempt to address where some sections have become overly technical and other sections overly simplified.

As we introduce Dystopia Rising LARP 2.0, understand that this design change isn’t a deviation from the core spirit of the game, but instead a tool to help address over five years of design and mechanical evolution that the community has requested. We have looked at the most commonly asked questions, addressed concerns and con icts, and added source materials, with the intent of ensuring that the LARP book addresses the expanding world as much as is needed without over-defining every square inch.

And as we, the creators, have now been provided the resources to reach for the larger vision of a more de ned world, you will see some changes in the focus of this LARP book verses books of the past. Descriptions of territories will be at a more macro level instead of micro de nitions, allowing players a greater concept of the territory as a whole instead of the individual strongholds. You will see that the Lore section has been expanded, as well as an addition to disease mechanics. In areas where wording was seen as confusing, we have brought on multiple writers and editors to reword these mechanics without changing the spirit of their use. We’ve added lists of defenses to called Skills, so that there is no confusion in regards to what Skills are used to counter what powers.

We also have added more details in regards to what we want as a community, how it is that we intend to grow, and guidelines for the culture that we want to encourage.

And we also know that no matter how hard we try, there will be sections for debate and argument. It is in the very nature of humanity to see ambiguity where the intent is cut and dried. That said, we will continue to support this book with online network updates to clarify details for you, our community members.

We’ve learned a lot in the past five years. If you look at our first publications compared to our most recent, you can see the education and growth that has happened as not only a community, but also as writers and designers. With this in mind, it was time to take everything that we learned and improve the resource without overly changing the content.

We hope that the materials within this document provide more than they detract from your experience, and above all else, we hope you have fun.
