
What Style of Game is Dystopia Rising?
======================================

Dystopia Rising is a Live Action Role Playing game where you, as the player, live in the world of Dystopia Rising for a weekend. Dystopia Rising is primarily a Players versus the Environment-style game, with the primary antagonists being provided by the storytellers, game Directors, and non-player characters. That said, Dystopia Rising does not discourage player-character verses player-character actions. While the primary focus of the game design and play is set on having the players square off against the threats of the wastelands, there are going to be times where the dynamic personalities and drives of different player-characters will result in player-characters working against each other. Player-character verses player-character activities can include, but are not limited to, different forms of social competition, economic warfare, contact safe combat, and even player-characters causing the demise of another player-character.

Dystopia Rising is intended to be a ‘Light Bleed’ game. ‘Bleed,’ basically defined, is how much of the game world bleeds out of game into your real life and how much of your real world perceptions ‘bleed’ into the game world. Because the setting of Dystopia Rising is of a pseudo-fantastical-science post zombie apocalypse world, the details and subject matter of the game space can often get very dark. Due to the sometimes grim environment in which the characters reside, we recommend that active playing of Dystopia Rising is limited to the play space as much as possible, and that players keep a comfortable distance between the actions of their characters and their own psychological headspace. While more experienced players can play more with the concept of bleed, and more concrete emotional ties with a character, players need to understand that Dystopia Rising is a very brutal and deadly world that can (and often does) result in the death of a character without much in the way of warning or preparation.

While we do not want to tell players how to have a good time, we encourage players in the Dystopia Rising Network to keep their game activities limited to the time between when an event starts and when that event ends. Roleplaying as your character, politicking, handling of ‘downtime actions’, and adding more ‘responsibility’ to your hobby of LARPing can cause a player to become burnt out, to become overly invested in their character, and to miss out on the fantastic social potential that this gaming community has provided.

Dystopia Rising is a lightest touch contact-safe game. A term coined in 2004 to describe the conflict style of Dystopia Rising, this form of combat is not intended to be a simulation of real world conflict situations. Erring on the safest form of lightest touch con ict, the lightest touch contact-safe game design allows for the adrenaline and immersion of being in a combat situation without causing the danger and potential harm that could come from large scale combat simulation. Without a doubt, the focus of Dystopia Rising is the role- play and the inter-character interactions that occur due to living in this unique game setting.

Lastly, Dystopia Rising is intended to be an Entertainment LARP. While many LARPs may be used as educational tools, devices for emotional growth, or as a means for self-definition, we do not have these focuses in mind as organizers of the Dystopia Rising Network. We are focused on entertaining you, providing you with an alternative play space that exists outside our modern world, and providing you with a community of friendly players who want to share their passion with the outside world. While LARP can be a fantastic tool for education, emotional exploration, and even a form of therapy, that is not the intent of Dystopia Rising. We are a game that focuses on shared story, amazing worlds, and entertainment. If at the end of the day we have achieved these things, then we feel successful.
